# User Notes And Open Issues

## Just one, or multiple, components per interface?

- If every component, including `h.*` components, is a separate interface, that's a **lot** of interfaces (too many).
  - Ergo: *At least **some** interfaces will handle multiple components.*
- In order for multiple components to be handled by a single interface, there needs to be a mechanism (i.e. some state) to indicate which component is being handled by the the current instance of the interface.

## Registry distinct, or part of document? Singletons?

- Options
  - **Singleton registry with any number of documents**
    - Singleton source of component info is always clear
    - Can pre-generate any number of documents
    - Document and registry interfaces can easily be updated independently
  - Singleton document with integrated registry
    - Simplest model, but inflexible - no way to pre-generate multiple "pages" for e.g. testing or swapping in-and-out (e.g. for SPA)
  - Singleton document plus singleton registry
    - Increased complexity with little benefit other than modularity
  - Multiple registries
    - Adds complexity (no longer obvious where components need to register), with minimal benefit
    - FWIW, the loader only generates a single module resolution per execution environment (one for server, one for client)
  - Tree of documents with integrated registries and ancestor-lookup-fallbacks
    - Form doesn't really follow function

## Where are IDs generated?

- If **all IDs are uniquely generated by the registry** (not by documents), it is then safe for portions of multiple documents to be mounted simultaneously.
  - This also allows for `MUM` entries to not be document-specific.

## Module Synchronization

- The registry must `fready` feature `mwi.compRegOpen` to let components know when it's open to component registrations.
- The registry can support deferred modules (and auto-load ones associated with pre-registered types).
- All component *types* must be registered before the registry can begin component lookup service, even if not all component types are fully defined.
  - All component *types* must be registered by *preload* modules.
- Component registration modules must provide one or more features beginning with a `mwi.comp.` prefix.
- The registry will `fwait` for all *preload-module* `mwi.comp.` features and then `fready` feature `mwi.compRegReady`.
  - It may make sense to refuse new (non-update) component registrations at this point.

## Component Registration Payload

- A fully-defined component either has an assigned `interface` or an assigned `template`.
- A deferred-load component must have an assigned `feature` to trigger module loading.
  - If a component has a `feature` but no `interface` or `template`, `fwait` for the `feature` to load the template.
- The registry supplies a unique component ID (`MS$<base-62 counter` (on server) or `MC$<base-62 counter>` (on client)).
- The registry supplies a unique CSS scope ID (`MW-<base-62 counter>`)

## MUM

- `[ id, type, {supplemental}? ]` - node ID, component type
  - The `mount` message-handler **might** need supplemental information about rehydrating the component.
  - *However*, each component should only need one *base* ID, e.g. `MS$1h` (server-generated) or `MC$a4` (client-generated), with sub-IDs for inner elements (e.g. `MS$1h$3` or `MC$a4$1`).

## Loading Modules

- `fwait` on a feature will automatically load deferred modules as needed.

## Data Structure (Layout)

- Input as structured, static, list data (document specification - Mesgjs list/NANOS)
- Stored as `MWIDocNode` instances
- As the doc spec is a *template*, there may be a 1-to-many relationship between spec "nodes" and doc nodes.
- Template invocation nodes must be passed as the slotting source
- Rendering children returns an array of zero or more nodes
  - Components may immediately append these, or aggregate them for later connection elsewhere

## Generating MWIDocNodes

- `document(from [spec] slotSrc=node?)`
  - Generate `MWIDocNode` nodes from the specification, optionally changing the slot-source node.
  - Q: How can the current slot source be obtained if a new one isn't supplied?
    - A: It probably only needs to be "carried forward" when supplied!

## Single-File-Component Layout

- Separation of concerns:
  - HTML and component content/structure (content aspect)
  - CSS (styling aspect)
  - Code
    - Some code might need to be attached to specific elements when a component is mounted
    - Some code might need to be added/included once to handle delegated events
  - Easier to understand SSR vs CSR:
    - SSR handles HTML/CSS content, with separate client-side hydration to connect code as needed
      - Less confusing than having content and code intertwined but managed in different places
    - CSR can manage all three (HTML, CSS, and code) directly

## Doc-Specs / Doc-Nodes / HTML / DOM

- The doc-spec works something like `outerHTML` and `innerHTML`
  - `setSpec` sets the current doc-node attributes and performs the equivalent of `setSubSpec` for the natural children
  - `setSubSpec`
    - unmounts and removes any previously-associated DOM nodes (like replacing a DOM node's `innerHTML`)
	- creates a new doc-node subtree from a list-style doc-spec
  - `getSpec` returns a reactive doc-spec tree describing the node and subtree
    - Note: This will **NOT** be the doc-spec object provided to `setSpec` (if any)
  - `getSubSpec` returns a reactive list of the subtree doc-specs
- Doc-nodes may be created and updated manually (use of doc-specs is not required)
- `getHTML` returns a (non-reactive) snapshot of the HTML for the current node and subtree
- `getDOM` returns a DOM node/tree for the current node and subtree
  - The DOM node/tree reactively updates in response to changes to the doc-spec tree.
- *Need to make sure doc-specs are unique when templating!*

## Some Specific Node Behaviors

### Fragment (`MWICoreFrag`, `m.frg`)

- Fragments are "transparent containers".
- The slotting source, if provided, is passed to the sub-doc, unmodified.
- The fragment (DOM- or HTML-) renders as the combined rendering of its sub-doc nodes and nothing more.
- Sub-specs are immediately transformed to sub-doc nodes upon application.

### HTML Generators

- Container types convert sub-specs to sub-doc nodes immediately upon application.
- Container types accept sub-doc modifications (e.g. `append`).
- Void types accept no sub-specs or sub-doc nodes.
- The slotting source, if provided, is passed to the sub-doc, unmodified.

### Slot (`MWICoreSlot`, `m.slot`)

- Content selection is determined based on the presence or absence of a slotting source and a `name` attribute in the `m.slot` node.
- If there is a slot source and it has a list-valued attribute (even an empty list) reactively corresponding to the name specified by the slot's `name` attribute, the list-value of the attribute is reactively interpreted as a sub-spec to populate an internal content fragment, which is then used for reactive HTML or DOM rendering.
- If there is a slot source but no `name` attribute (or it is reactively empty/undefined) *and* the slot source has (a non-zero number of) natural children, the sub-spec of the source node is used to reactively populate an internal content fragment, which is then used for HTML or DOM rendering.
- If neither of the above sets of conditions is satisfied, the slot's own natural sub-doc, if any, is reactively used for HTML or DOM rendering.
- Slot nodes convert sub-specs immediately to sub-doc nodes upon application and accept "live" modifications (e.g. `append`).

### Template (`MWICoreTpl`)

- Templates have no specific component type.
- The `MWICoreTpl` interface is assigned by `MWIDocument(createNode)` for components with `tpl`-based registrations.
- HTML and DOM nodes are rendered against an internal fragment that is *statically* initialized from the component's `tpl` spec by delegating e.g. `getDOM` and `getHTML` to the fragment.
- The instantiating node is the initial slot source for internal-fragment content.
- The internal fragment *reactively* slots against the template instantiation node's attributes and/or current *sub-spec* (which might be derived "on-the-fly" from live sub-dom nodes).
- The template instantiation node itself slots against its inherited slot source.
- Templates accept a sub-spec, with lazy conversion to sub-doc nodes upon modification (e.g. `append`).
- The template node's sub-spec and sub-doc are used only for slotting (never for direct rendering).
- The node will revert to a sub-spec and discard any live sub-doc nodes if a new (sub-)spec is applied.

### Text (`MWICoreText`, `m.t`)

- DOM-renders to an `<output>` element for non-empty text and nothing (no DOM nodes at all) for empty text.

### Default Behavior (`MWIDocNode`)

Default behaviors are based on the assumption that most types will be associated with custom components using (either smart or static) template-like behavior.

- Assume nodes will be slot-sources for their content (otherwise, sub-interface should override).
- Check the schema to determine whether any sub-content should be permitted (no if void).
- Check the schema to determine whether sub-specs should immediately be converted to sub-doc nodes (autoDoc is not false).
  - The conversion should be split out to a helper function so that `MWICoreTpl` or similar interfaces can JIT-convert doc-specs to sub-doc nodes for editing.

### Notes

- If a component has dynamically-chosen output, `hasChildren` for its interface should be based on the current, reactively-selected output.
- Rendering from a sub-spec should result in fresh DOM nodes.
- Rendering from sub-doc nodes should generally reuse initially-created DOM nodes, reactively applying updates.
